# 2.1 Notes

## Definitions

### Graph

A graph is defined as an ordered pair $G = (V, E)$, where:
-   $V$ is a set of vertices (or nodes).
-   $E$ is a set of edges, where each edge is a pair of vertices $\{u, v\}$ and $u, v \in V$.

### Cycle
A list of vertices where each subsequent element is adjacacent, and the beginning of the list = the end. AKA a path through a graph that eventually comes back to itself.

### Tree

Graphs that are connected and contain no cycles.

### Chromatic Number

The minimum number of colors needed to color a graph such that no two adjacent vertices share the same color.

Note from the book:

> If the graphs represented friendships between people, then the chromatic number would tell us the minimum number of groups we would need if we wanted to divide up everyone into groups of people who were not yet friends.

### Isomorphic

Two graphs are the same except for the names of vertices.

Must have an isomorphism: A bijective function that renames the vertices.

### Subgraph

We say that $G' = (V', E')$ is a **subgraph** of $G = (V, E)$, and write $G' \subseteq G$, provided $V' \subseteq V$ and $E' \subseteq E$.

We say that $G' = (V', E')$ is an **induced subgraph** of $G = (V, E)$ provided $V' \subseteq V$ and every edge in $E$ whose vertices are still in $V'$ is also an edge in $E'$.

### Complete graph

A graph with all possible edges added. $K_n$ is the complete graph of $n$ vertices.

> Each vertex in $K_n$ is adjacent to $(n-1)$ other vertices.

There are $n(n-1)/2$ edges in $K_n$.

## Practice
*Questions not answered here were most likely answered on paper, or directly in the book's interface.*

### Example 2.1.3
$
\begin{aligned}
    G_1 &= (V_1, E_1) \text{ where } V_1 = \{a, b, c\} \text{ and } E_1 = \{\{a, b\}, \{a, c\}, \{b, c\}\}; \\
    G_2 &= (V_2, E_2) \text{ where } V_2 = \{u, v, w\} \text{ and } E_2 = \{\{u, v\}, \{u, w\}, \{v, w\}\}.
\end{aligned}
$

Are these graphs the same?

No, because they are isomorphic but not equal.

### Reading question (RQ) 2

20

### RQ 3 (what I'm curious about)

Is there a mathematical way to determine how many unique cycles a graph contains?

For $K_{m,n}$ what values of m and n are feasible to create a complete bipartate graph?

How do we determine a valid vertex coloring of a graph?

## Practice Problems

3. 14,5,8
4. 34
5. 28
6. 6,7,1,3

## Additional Exercises

1. 45. We count the number of edges in the graph.

7. Graphs 1, 2, and 4 are bipartate.

8. All $C_n$ where n is ≥3 and  even are bipartate.

## Full glossary (copied)

### Graph
A collection of vertices, some of which are connected by edges. More precisely, a pair of sets $V$ and $E$, where $V$ is a set of vertices and $E$ is a set of 2-element subsets of $V$.

### Adjacent
Two vertices are adjacent if they are connected by an edge. Two edges are adjacent if they share a vertex.

### Bipartite graph
A graph for which it is possible to divide the vertices into two disjoint sets such that there are no edges between any two vertices in the same set.

### Complete bipartite graph
A bipartite graph for which every vertex in the first set is adjacent to every vertex in the second set.

### Complete graph
A graph in which every pair of vertices is adjacent.

### Connected
A graph is connected if there is a path from any vertex to any other vertex.

### Chromatic number
The minimum number of colors required in a proper vertex coloring of the graph.

### Cycle
A path (see below) that starts and stops at the same vertex, but contains no other repeated vertices.

### Degree of a vertex
The number of edges incident to a vertex.

### Euler trail
A walk which uses each edge exactly once.

### Euler circuit
An Euler trail which starts and stops at the same vertex.

### Multigraph
A multigraph is just like a graph but can contain multiple edges between two vertices as well as single edge loops (that is an edge from a vertex to itself).

### Path
A path is a walk that doesn’t repeat any vertices (or edges) except perhaps the first and last. If a path starts and ends at the same vertex, it is called a cycle.

### Planar
A graph which can be drawn (in the plane) without any edges crossing.

### Subgraph
We say that $G'$ is a subgraph of $G$ if every vertex and edge of $G'$ is also a vertex or edge of $G$. We say $G'$ is an induced subgraph of $G$ if every vertex of $G'$ is a vertex of $G$ and each pair of vertices in $G'$ are adjacent in $G'$ if and only if they are adjacent in $G$.

### Tree
A connected graph with no cycles. (If we remove the requirement that the graph is connected, the graph is called a forest.) The vertices in a tree with degree 1 are called leaves.

### Vertex coloring
An assignment of colors to each of the vertices of a graph. A vertex coloring is proper if adjacent vertices are always colored differently.

### Walk
A sequence of vertices such that consecutive vertices (in the sequence) are adjacent (in the graph). A walk in which no edge is repeated is called a trail, and a trail in which no vertex is repeated (except possibly the first and last) is called a path.

