# 3.3 Non Disjoint Outcomes

## Sums

- Currently, sum principle only works if the intersection of the two sets of outcomes is empty
- We must know the length of $A \cap B$ if we wanted to find non disjoint outcomes
- The number of outcomes is the sum minus the intersection


### Example 3.3.2

|A| = 5 choose 2 = 10
|B| = 5 choose 4 = 5

Apparently $A \cap B$ is 3 choose 2...?

### Example 3.3.3

It's just 12 + 5 + 8
25

Nope I'm wrong. It's 15; less than my number because A could be 1 and C could be 1 where there was only 1 student.

## Principle of Inclusion/Exclusion

For any finite sets $A$ and $B$,

$$|A \cup B| = |A| + |B| - |A \cap B| $$

### Example 3.3.5

Since we already know the intersection is 3 choose 2, it's 15 - 3 choose 2

## Cardinality of a union (3 sets)

For any finite sets $A$, $B$, and $C$,

$$|A \cup B \cup C| = |A| + |B| + |C| - |A \cap B| - |A \cap C| - |B \cap C| + |A \cap B \cap C|$$

### Example 3.3.7

25 multiples of 2
16 multiples of 3
10 multiples of 5

8 multiples of 2 and 3
5 multiples of 2 and 51
3 multiples of 3 and 5

25 + 16 + 20 = 51
51 - 8 - 5 - 3 = 45
45 + 1 (there is 1 multiple of all three) = 46

## Distinctions with the Product Principle

Usage of the product principle doesn't apply when one set of outcomes changes based on another outcome.

### Example 3.3.8

1. 26 * 26 * 26
2. 26 * 25 * 24

### Example 3.3.9

Depending on what letter is selected as the first letter, the size of the outcomes change. For example Z being the first letter would restrict the outcomes of the next two letters more than A.

# Practice Problems

9. Gridtown USA, besides having excellent donut shops, is known for its precisely laid out grid of streets and avenues. Streets run east-west, and avenues north-south, for the entire stretch of the town, never curving and never interrupted by parks or schools or the like.
Suppose you live on the corner of 5th and 5th and work on the corner of 18th and 18th. Thus you must travel 26 blocks to get to work as quickly as possible.

9a. How many different routes can you take to work, assuming you want to get there as quickly as possible?

Simply 26 choose 13, since the length is 26 and the y-depth is 13.
10400600

9b. Now suppose you want to stop and get a donut on the way to work, from your favorite donut shop on the corner of 15th Ave. and 14th St. How many routes to work, stopping at the donut shop, can you take (again, ensuring the shortest possible route)?

We will find the amount of routes to (15,14), and multiply it by the amount of routes to (18,18).

Length to 15th and 14th: (15 - 5) + (14 - 5) = 19.

To 15th and 14th: 19 choose 9.

Length to 18th and 18th: 7
From 15th and 14th to 18th and 18th: 7 choose 4

Therefore: 19 choose 9 * 7 choose 4

3233230

**Why multiplication?**
You take a route to the donut shop, AND you take a route from the donut shop to work. Product principle.

9c. Gridtown USA, besides having excellent donut shops, is known for its precisely laid out grid of streets and avenues. Streets run east-west, and avenues north-south, for the entire stretch of the town, never curving and never interrupted by parks or schools or the like.
Suppose you live on the corner of 5th and 5th and work on the corner of 18th and 18th. Thus you must travel 26 blocks to get to work as quickly as possible.

Pothole between (6, 7) and (6, 8)

Let's think about what we have to do to **hit** the pothole. You have to:

1. Drive from (5,5) to (6,7)
2. Drive from (6,7) to (6,8): **POTHOLE!**
3. Drive from (6,8) to (18,18)

We will be using the product principle since, for any outcome in the 1st "trip" (to the pothole), you will be doing that AND taking any other outcome in the second "trip" (from (7,8) to work).

Therefore:

(5,5) to (6,7) = 3 choose 2
(6,8) to (18,18) = 22 choose 10

3 choose 2 * 22 choose 10 = 1058148

We cannot use **any** of those routes. Lets subtract them from our total amount of routes:

10400600 - 1939938 = 8460662

9d.

Donut shops are at (6,7) and (15,14)

Let's say A is the set of routes that make it to the $(6,7)$ donut shop, and B is the set of routes that make it to the $(15,14)$ donut shop.

We already know $|B|$: 3233230

|A| is 3 choose 2 * 23 choose 12.

(since 23 choose 12 represents how many routes there are from (6,7) to (18,18)

4056234 = |A|

We must find $|A \cap B|$.

House to donut shop: 3 (3 choose 2)

Donut shop to second donut shop: 11440 (16 choose 9)

Second donut shop to work: 35 (7 choose 4)

So therefore $|A \cap B|$ = 1,201,200.

Unfortunately, in our final answer, we double counted the routes where we were gloing to the second donut shop. Using the principle of inclusion/exclusion, we add the two together and subtract the intersection. 3233230 + 4056234 - 1201200 = 6,088,264, which is our final answer.




