# 3.4 Combinations and Permutations

**Permutation** - possible rearrangement of objects

### Example 3.4.3

Simply rearrange the elements in the codomain (8!)

## Permutation Notation

$P(n,k)$ is choosing $k$ objects from a larger collection of $n$ objects

Represented as n!/(n-k)!

## Counting Sets

### Example 3.4.8

It is just a 5 permutation of 5 elements- $P(5,5)$- times 12 choose 5, so

$$1,5! * {12 \choose 5}k$$

### Example 3.4.10

1. ${14 \choose 6}$
2. ${14 \choose 6}$ * 6!

### Closed Formula for Choosing

$${n \choose k} = \frac{n!}{k!(n-k)!}$$

## When to use each

If counting sets, think combinations. If counting sequences, think permutations.

# Reading Questions

1. Yes, true, since 2! = 2 and to get permutations we multiply by the factorial
2. False, since 3! ≠ 3
3. Everything about the quotient theorem

# Practice Problems

11. Consider functions $f : \left\lbrace1,2,3,4,5,6\right\rbrace \longrightarrow \left\lbrace1,2,3,4,5,6,7\right\rbrace$

    **a. How many functions are there total?**

    Well, any member of the domain can map to any member of the codomain. The domain length is 6 and the codomain length is 7. So we are left with $7^6$. 7 combinations for each of the 6 slots on the domain.

    **b. How many functions are injective?**

    An injective function is one where every element of the codomain isn't mapped to more than one element of the domain. In other words, in a non-injective function, we can have 1 and 2 both map to 5, but that's not possible in an injective function. Therefore, our options are limited. It helps to think as if we are "arranging" the elements of in the codomain into a sequence, with a maximum of 6 elements in the sequence. Thus, the question becomes, given 7 possible items, and 6 slots, how many different sequences are there? The answer is permutations;

    $$P(7,6)$$

    **c. How many of those injective functions are increasing?**

    We are still choosing 6 elements from the codomain of 7. However, this time the order is finite, so we are counting sets instead of sequences. Therefore the answer is combinations.

    $${7 \choose 6}$$


