# 3.5 Counting Multisets

## Definition 3.5.1

A multiset is an unordered collection of elements, each of which can appear any number of times. The number of times an element appears is called its multiplicity.

### Notation

Same as sets: $\lbrace 1,2,2,5 \rbrace$

## Have Some Cookies

Distributing 7 cookies to 4 kids, each kid will end up with n cookies ($0 ≤ n ≤ 7$)

Not 7^4 because $n_1 + n_2 + n_3 + n_4 + n_5 + n_6 + n_7$ must add to 7

### Example 3.5.2

You grab a handful of ten jelly beans from a bag that contains six flavors. Write down three possible outcomes using both multisets and strings of numbers.

Outcome 1: $\lbrace A,A,A,A,A,A,A,A,A,A \rbrace$

Outcome 2: $130002$

Outcome 3: $\lbrace A,A,A,B,D,E,E,E,F,F \rbrace$

## Sticks and stones

Sticks and stones can be represented as a bit string, where every **stick** is 1 and every **stone** is 0.

You're choosing where to put the sticks.

Stick count ($s$) = partition count - 1, $c$ = choose count

Total combinations for all $s$ and $c$:

$$\binom{s + c}{s}$$

### Example 3.5.4
$s=9$, $c=6$

Solution: $f \cdot \binom{15}{9}$

### Example 3.5.5

The stick count is how many digits there are (10) minus 1 (9)\

$s = 9, c = 7$

Answer: $\binom{16}{9}$

### Example 3.6.6

We are choosing 13

Our stick count is 4

1. $\binom{17}{4}$

For 2:

Assign 1 to each

We now have 8 left to choose, still 4 sticks

2. $\binom{12}{4}$

For 3:

Assign 2 to each, same process

3. $\binom{7}{4}$

## Counting With Functions

Elements of the domain of a function are distinct when we consider assigning them to an element of the codomain. E.g. 1 => a is different than 2 => a. But when we consider counting sets, 1 and 2 are the same (in fact there is no order at all.

## Reading questions

1. A, since this would be 3^6
2. The order of the stones within one partition of sticks does not matter. The order of the partitions themselves does not matter. We do allow repeats of elements (e.g. two of the same ice cream flavor).
3. How to tell if it's a multiset problem

## Additional Exercises

1. Each of the counting problems below can be solved with sticks and stones. For each, say what outcome the diagram

$$\circ\circ\circ|\circ||\circ\circ|$$

represents, if there are the correct number of sticks and stones for the problem. Otherwise, say why the diagram does not represent any outcome, and what a correct diagram would look like.

a. **How many ways are there to select a handful of 6 jellybeans from a jar that contains 5 different flavors?**

We can choose 6 beans ($\circ \times 6$) and we have 5 flavors ($| \times 4$).

The diagram would represent:

$$\begin{align}
\text{Flavor 1} \ \ & \text{3} \\
\text{Flavor 2} \ \ & \text{1} \\
\text{Flavor 3} \ \ & \text{0} \\
\text{Flavor 4} \ \ & \text{2} \\
\end{align}$$

b. **How many ways can you distribute 5 identical lollipops to 6 kids?**

We can choose out of 5 lollipops ($\circ \times 5$) and split among 6 kids ($| \times 5$). So an example digram would look like this:

$$\circ|\circ|\circ|\circ|\circ|$$

In that diagram, every kid gets one lollipop except the last kid. He gets zero :(


$$\begin{align}
&\circ \  \circ\\
&\frown
\end{align}$$

c. **How many 6-letter words can you make using the 5 vowels in alphabetical order?**

We cannot control the order here. We can control how long we "stick" on each vowel before moving on to the next one (how many times we repeat it).

So, we have 4 sticks ($5 \text{ letters} - 1$) and 6 stones (6 spaces to place a letter).

Therefore, yes, the diagram does work and it would mean this string:

$$\text{aaaeo}$$

d. **How many solutions are there to the equation $x_1 + x_2 + x_3 + x_4 = 6\text{.}$**

This time, we have 6 elements, and while it might seem like we have 4 sticks since there are 4 groups to put numbers in, we actually have 3 since sticks are $\text{group count} - 1$.

So, an example diagram:

$$\circ|\circ\circ|\circ|\circ\circ$$

In that case, $x_1$ would be 1, $x_2$ would be 2, $x_3$ would be 1, and $x_4$ would be 2.
