# 1.6: Chapter Summary (Practice Problems)
*Most of my notes are on paper.*

## 9. For all integers $n$, if $n$ is odd, then $7n$ is odd. Prove the statement

### Direct proof 

Consider a number n where n is an odd integer. Based on the definition of an odd number, n can be represented by 2a + 1 where a is any integer. $7(2a + 1) = 14a + 7$. $14a$ must be even, since 2 is a factor of 14. 
Therefore, 14a + 7 is odd because an even number plus an odd number is odd.

### Converse: For all integers $n$, if $7n$ is odd, then $n$ is odd.

Proof by contradiction. Consider an integer $n$ where $7n$ is odd, and $n$ is even. Since $n$ is even, it can be represented by $2a$ where a is an integer. Therefore, $7n = 14a$. $7n$ must be even, since 2 is a factor of 14. However, that contradicts the assumption that 7n must be odd. Therefore, for all integers n, if 7n is odd, then n is odd.

## 10. Suppose you break your piggy bank and scoop up a handful of 22 coins (pennies, nickels, dimes, and quarters).

### a. Prove that you must have at least 6 coins of a single denomination.

There are exactly 4 denominations of coins in hand, and 22 coins total.
Consider each denomination is assigned a set $s_i : 0 < i < 4$ containing every coin of that denomination.
Consider that the coins are equally distributed across each denomination. 
Therefore, there are 22/4 coins in each set. Which yields 5.5
However, the cardinality of a set must be a whole number, therefore $|s_i|$ must be greater than 5 for some i.

### Suppose you have an odd number of pennies. Prove that you must have an odd number of at least one of the other types of coins.

There are 4 denominations of coins. Again, a set will be assigned to each denomination whose cardinality is equal to the amount of that denomination we have in hand.

The set of pennies is $p$. The cardinality can be represented by $|p|=2a+1$ where a is any integer.

$|n|,|d|,|q|>0$

$|p| + |n| + |d| + |q| = 22$

$2a + 1 + |n| + |d| + |q| = 22$

$2a + |n| + |d| + |q| = 21$

Consider all three other sets are even.

$2a + 2b + 2c + 2d = 21$

$2(a + b + c + d) = 21$

$a + b + c + d = 10.5$

Which is invalid because a, b, c, d should all be integers.

### How many coins would you need to scoop up to be sure that you either had 4 coins that were all the same or 4 coins that were all different? Prove your answer.

Let p be 4 coins all the same let q be 4 coins all different

Let n be coin count

p:

n/4 ≥ 4

n ≥ 16

easy enough

q:

p, n, d, q

i give up